Java occ (#693)
cap-js/docs: java/query-execution.md

entity Orders as select from bookshop.Order inner join bookshop.OrderHeader on Order.header.ID = OrderHeader.ID { Order.ID, Order.items, OrderHeader.status };
```

## Concurrency Control

Concurrency control allows to protect your data against unexpected concurrent changes.

### Optimistic Concurrency Control {#optimistic}

Use _optimistic_ concurrency control to detect concurrent modification of data _across requests_. The implementation relies on a _version_ value - the _ETag_, which changes whenever an entity instance is updated. Typically, the ETag value is stored in an element of the versioned entity.

#### Optimistic Concurrency Control in OData

> In the [OData protocol](../guides/providing-services#etag), the implementation relies on `ETags` and `If-Match` headers in the HTTP request. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the [OData protocol](../guides/providing-services#etag), the implementation relies on `ETag` and `If-Match` headers in the HTTP request. 
```

{#on-update-example}

```cds
entity Order : cuid {
    @odata.etag
    @cds.on.update : $now @cds.on.insert : $now
    modifiedAt : Timestamp;
    product : Association to Product;
}
```

#### The ETag Predicate {#etag-predicate}

An ETag can also be used programmatically in custom code. Use the `CqnEtagPredicate` to specify the expected ETag values in an update or delete operation. You can create an ETag predicate using the `CQL.eTag` or the `StructuredType.eTag` methods.

```java
PersistenceService db = ...
Instant expectedLastModification = ... 
CqnUpdate update = Update.entity(ORDER).entry(newData)
                         .where(o -> o.id().eq(85).and(
                                     o.eTag(expectedLastModification)));

Result rs = db.execute(update);

if (rs.rowCount() == 0) {
    // order 85 does not exist or was modified concurrently
}
```

In the example above, an `Order` is updated. The update is protected with a specified ETag value (the expected last modification timestamp). The update is executed only if the expectation is met.

::: warning 

> No exception is thrown if an ETag validation does not match but the execution of the update (or delete) will succeed. Instead, the application has to check the `rowCount` of the `Result`. The value 0 indicates that no row was updated (or deleted).

Reviewer 2: Is my understanding correct?
If ETag validation fails, the update operation succeeds but doesn't change any data. Instead the application has to check if an update was successful by checking the `rowCount`. 
Right? And in that case? I guess my custom code should throw an exception then or output a warning or sth alike, right?

> No exception is thrown if an ETag validation does not match but the execution of the update (or delete) will succeed. Instead, the application has to check the `rowCount` of the `Result`. The value 0 indicates that no row was updated (or deleted).

Reviewer 2: Is that stating the obvious?
```suggestion
No exception is thrown if an ETag validation does not match. Instead, the execution of the update (or delete) succeeds but doesn't apply any changes. Ensure that the application checks the `rowCount` of the `Result` and implement your error handling. If the value of `rowCount` is 0, that indicates that no row was updated (or deleted).
```

:::

:::warning
No ETag checks are executed when an upsert is executed.
:::

#### Providing new ETag Values with Update Data

The new ETag value can be provided in the update data.

A convenient option to determine a new ETag value upon update is the [@cds.on.update](../guides/domain-modeling#cds-on-update) annotation as in the [example above](#on-update-example). The CAP Java runtime will automatically handle the `@cds.on.update` annoation and will set a new value in the data before the update is executed. Such _managed data_ can be used with ETags of type `Timestamp` or `UUID` only.

It is also possible, but not recommended, that the new ETag value is provided by custom code in a `@Before`-update handler.

:::warning
If an ETag element is annotated `@cds.on.update` and custom code explicitly sets a value for this element the runtime will _not_ generate a new value upon update but the value, which comes from the custom code will be used.
::: 

#### Runtime Managed Versions

> CAP Java also to store ETag values in _version elements_. For version elements, the values are exclusively managed by the runtime without the option to set them in custom code. Annotate an element with `@cds.java.version` to advise the runtime to manage its value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CAP Java also supports to store ETag values in _version elements_. For version elements, the values are exclusively managed by the runtime without the option to set them in custom code. Annotate an element with `@cds.java.version` to advise the runtime to manage its value.
```

```cds
entity Order : cuid {
    @odata.etag
    @cds.java.version
    version : Int32;
    product : Association to Product;
}
```

Additionally to elements of type `Timestamp` and `UUID`, `@cds.java.version` supports all integral types `Uint8`, ... `Int64`. For timestamp, the value is set to `$now` upon update, for elements of type UUID a new UUID is generated, and for elements of integral type the value is incremented.

> Version elements can be used with an [ETag predicate](#etag-predicate) to programmatically check an expected ETag value. Moreover, if additionally annotated with `@odata.etag`, they can be for [conflict detection](../guides/providing-services#etag) in OData.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Version elements can be used with an [ETag predicate](#etag-predicate) to programmatically check an expected ETag value. Moreover, if additionally annotated with `@odata.etag`, they are used for [conflict detection](../guides/providing-services#etag) in OData.
```

entity Orders as select from bookshop.Order inner join bookshop.OrderHeader on Order.header.ID = OrderHeader.ID { Order.ID, Order.items, OrderHeader.status };
```

> ## Concurreny Control

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Concurrency Control
```

> Concurreny control allows to protect your data against unexpected concurrent changes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Concurrency control allows to protect your data against unexpected concurrent changes.
```

> ### Optimistic Concurreny Control {#optimistic}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Optimistic Concurrency Control {#optimistic}
```

Use _optimistic_ concurrency control to detect concurrent modification of data _across requests_. The implementation relies on a version value - the _ETag_, which changes whenever an entity instance is updated. Typically, the ETag value is stored in an element of the versioned entity.

#### Optimistic Concurrency Control in OData

In the [OData protocol](../guides/providing-services#etag), the implementation relies on ETags. 

The `@odata.etag` annotation indicates to the OData protocol adapter that the value of an annotated element should be [used as the ETag for conflict detection](../guides/providing-services#etag):

{#on-update-example}

```cds
entity Order : cuid {
    @odata.etag
    @cds.on.update : $now @cds.on.insert : $now
    modifiedAt : Timestamp;
    product : Association to Product;
}
```

#### The ETag Predicate {#etag-predicate}

> An ETag can also be used programatically in custom code. Use the `CqnEtagPredicate` to specify the expected ETag values in an update or delete operation. You can create an ETag predicate using the `CQL.etag` or the `StructuredType.etag` methods.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
An ETag can also be used programmatically in custom code. Use the `CqnEtagPredicate` to specify the expected ETag values in an update or delete operation. You can create an ETag predicate using the `CQL.etag` or the `StructuredType.etag` methods.
```

Result rs = db.execute(update);

if (rs.rowCount() == 0) {
    // order 85 does not exist or was modified concurrently
}
```

In the example above, an `Order` is updated. The update is protected with a specified ETag value (the expected last modification timestamp). The update is executed only if the expectation is met.

::: warning 
No exception is thrown if an ETag validation does not match but the execution of the update (or delete) will succeed. Instead, the application has to check the `rowCount` of the `Result`. The value 0 indicates that no row was updated (or deleted).
:::

:::warning
No ETag checks are execute when an upsert is executed.
:::

#### Providing new ETag Values with Update Data

The new ETag value can be provided in the update data.

A convenient option to determine a new ETag value upon update is the [@cds.on.update](../guides/domain-modeling#cds-on-update) annotation as in the [example above](#on-update-example). The CAP Java runtime will automatically handle the `@cds.on.update` annoation and will set a new value in the data before the update is executed. Such _managed data_ can be used with ETags of type `Timestamp` or `UUID` only.

> It is also possible, but not recommend, that the new ETag value is provided by custom code in a `@Before`-update handler.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is also possible, but not recommended, that the new ETag value is provided by custom code in a `@Before`-update handler.
```

:::warning

> If an ETag element is annotated `@cds.on.update` and custom code explicitly sets a value for this element the runtime will _not_ generated a new value upon update but the value, which comes from the custom code will be used.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If an ETag element is annotated `@cds.on.update` and custom code explicitly sets a value for this element the runtime will _not_ generate a new value upon update but the value, which comes from the custom code will be used.
```

    product : Association to Product;
}
```

#### The ETag Predicate {#etag-predicate}

An ETag can also be used programatically in custom code. Use the `CqnEtagPredicate` to specify the expected ETag values in an update or delete operation. You can create an ETag predicate using the `CQL.etag` or the `StructuredType.etag` methods.

```java
PersistenceService db = ...
Instant expectedLastModification = ... 
CqnUpdate update = Update.entity(ORDER).entry(newData)
                         .where(o -> o.id().eq(85).and(
                                     o.etag(expectedLastModification)));

Result rs = db.execute(update);

if (rs.rowCount() == 0) {
    // order 85 does not exist or was modified concurrently
}
```

In the example above, an `Order` is updated. The update is protected with a specified ETag value (the expected last modification timestamp). The update is executed only if the expectation is met.

::: warning 
No exception is thrown if an ETag validation does not match but the execution of the update (or delete) will succeed. Instead, the application has to check the `rowCount` of the `Result`. The value 0 indicates that no row was updated (or deleted).
:::

:::warning

> No ETag checks are execute when an upsert is executed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
No ETag checks are executed when an upsert is executed.
```

:::

#### Providing new ETag Values with Update Data

The new ETag value can be provided in the update data.

A convenient option to determine a new ETag value upon update is the [@cds.on.update](../guides/domain-modeling#cds-on-update) annotation as in the [example above](#on-update-example). The CAP Java runtime will automatically handle the `@cds.on.update` annoation and will set a new value in the data before the update is executed. Such _managed data_ can be used with ETags of type `Timestamp` or `UUID` only.

It is also possible, but not recommend, that the new ETag value is provided by custom code in a `@Before`-update handler.

:::warning
If an ETag element is annotated `@cds.on.update` and custom code explicitly sets a value for this element the runtime will _not_ generated a new value upon update but the value, which comes from the custom code will be used.
::: 

#### Runtime Managed Versions

> CAP Java also to store ETag values in _version elements_. For version elements, the values are exclusively managed by the runtime without the option to set them in custom code. Annotate an element with `@cds.java.version` to advise the runtime to manage it's value.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
CAP Java also to store ETag values in _version elements_. For version elements, the values are exclusively managed by the runtime without the option to set them in custom code. Annotate an element with `@cds.java.version` to advise the runtime to manage its value.
```

```cds
entity Order : cuid {
    @odata.etag
    @cds.java.version
    version : Int32;
    product : Association to Product;
}
```

Additionally to elements of type `Timestamp` and `UUID`, `@cds.java.version` supports all integral types `Uint8`, ... `Int64`. For timestamp, the value is set to `$now` upon update, for elements of type UUID a new UUID is generated, and for elements of integral type the value is incremented.

> Version elements can be used with an [ETag predicate](#etag-predicate) to programatically check an expected ETag value. Moreover, if additionally annotated with `@odata.etag`, they can be for [conflict detection](../guides/providing-services#etag) in OData.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Version elements can be used with an [ETag predicate](#etag-predicate) to programmatically check an expected ETag value. Moreover, if additionally annotated with `@odata.etag`, they can be for [conflict detection](../guides/providing-services#etag) in OData.
```

##### Expected Version from Data

> If the update data contains a value for a version element this values is used as the _expected_ value for the version. This allows to very conveniently use version elements in programatic flow:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the update data contains a value for a version element this values is used as the _expected_ value for the version. This allows to use version elements in programmatic flow conveniently:
```

}
```

In the example above, an `Order` is updated. The update is protected with a specified ETag value (the expected last modification timestamp). The update is executed only if the expectation is met.
In the previous example, an `Order` is updated. The update is protected with a specified ETag value (the expected last modification timestamp). The update is executed only if the expectation is met.

::: warning 
::: warning Application has to check the result
No exception is thrown if an ETag validation does not match but the execution of the update (or delete) will succeed. Instead, the application has to check the `rowCount` of the `Result`. The value 0 indicates that no row was updated (or deleted).
:::

> :::warning

Author: I think this warning is quite important. Maybe we should keep it.

Reviewer 2: This sentence is now in line 287. I think it fits and I also want to avoid two warning boxes following each other.
Do you want to keep it in a warning box?

Author: We can do without the warning box.

::: warning Application has to check the result
No exception is thrown if an ETag validation does not match but the execution of the update (or delete) will succeed. Instead, the application has to check the `rowCount` of the `Result`. The value 0 indicates that no row was updated (or deleted).
:::

#### Providing new ETag Values with Update Data

A convenient option to determine a new ETag value upon update is the [@cds.on.update](../guides/domain-modeling#cds-on-update) annotation as in the [example above](#on-update-example). The CAP Java runtime automatically handles the `@cds.on.update` annotation and sets a new value in the data before the update is executed. Such _managed data_ can be used with ETags of type `Timestamp` or `UUID` only.

We do not recommend providing a new ETag value by custom code in a `@Before`-update handler. If you do set a value explicitly in custom code and an ETag element is annotated with `@cds.on.update`, the runtime does not generate a new value upon update for this element. Instead, the value that comes from your custom code is used. 

#### Runtime-Managed Versions

> CAP Java also stores ETag values in _version elements_. For version elements, the values are exclusively managed by the runtime without the option to set them in custom code. Annotate an element with `@cds.java.version` to advise the runtime to manage its value.

Author: ```suggestion
CAP Java also allows to store ETag values in _version elements_. For version elements, the values are exclusively managed by the runtime without the option to set them in custom code. Annotate an element with `@cds.java.version` to advise the runtime to manage its value.
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can store ETag values in _version elements_. For version elements, the values are exclusively managed by the runtime without the option to set them in custom code. Annotate an element with `@cds.java.version` to advise the runtime to manage its value.
```

Author: ```suggestion
Alternatively, you can store ETag values in _version elements_. For version elements, the values are exclusively managed by the runtime without the option to set them in custom code. Annotate an element with `@cds.java.version` to advise the runtime to manage its value.
```

}
```

> Additionally, to elements of type `Timestamp` and `UUID`, `@cds.java.version` supports all integral types `Uint8`, ... `Int64`. For timestamp, the value is set to `$now` upon update, for elements of type UUID a new UUID is generated, and for elements of integral type the value is incremented.

Author: ```suggestion
As opposed to `@cds.on.update`, which allows for ETag elements with type `Timestamp` or `UUID` only, `@cds.java.version` additionally supports all integral types `Uint8`, ... `Int64`. For timestamp, the value is set to `$now` upon update, for elements of type UUID a new UUID is generated, and for elements of integral type the value is incremented.
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Compared to `@cds.on.update`, which allows for ETag elements with type `Timestamp` or `UUID` only, `@cds.java.version` additionally supports all integral types `Uint8`, ... `Int64`. For timestamp, the value is set to `$now` upon update, for elements of type UUID a new UUID is generated, and for elements of integral type the value is incremented.
```
